---
title: "Tesla FSD First Impressions"
date: 2021-12-26T23:47:16-05:00
draft: true
---


On a non-stop, 15 hour trip from Portland, Oregon, to Los Angeles, California, I drove down the West Coast in a recently purchased Tesla model 3. The journey was nearly 1,000 miles long and driven almost exclusively by the Full Self Driving (FSD) system. With the car navigating itself, I was left with an excellent opportunity to take in the scenery and enjoy the car without handling each curve in the road. The vehicle effortlessly handled standard highway situations and always alerted me to potentially hazardous situations. I intervened four times to address unsafe conditions that, in retrospect, the car would have dealt with sufficiently. With those exceptions, the most work I had to do was navigate off highways to reach superchargers. With the FSD system on, I could pay attention while not getting tired on such a long drive.

At the time of the journey, there were two levels of autonomous driving, basic Autopilot and Full Self Driving (FSD). As the name implies, Autopilot keeps the vehicle safely in your lane and matches your speed to traffic. It is best suited for highways since it can not handle turns. FSD is an optional software package that encompasses Autopilot and much more. The FSD package is available for all Teslas made after late 2016. It can navigate through on-ramps & off-ramps, safely and autonomously change lanes to pass slow traffic and to allow faster vehicles to pass. Off highways, the FSD system follows traffic lights, backs into spots, and parallel parks perfectly.

Contrary to its name, the FSD system is far from autonomous. Navigating winding roads and roundabouts often cause the car to overturn and require the driver to take over. On private roads such as driveways and parking lots, the driver can not activate the FSD system. Making turns at intersections or stop signs is impossible, and navigating city streets is a foreboding thought.

The basic Autopilot comes with every Tesla and, while impressive, is hardly unique. Several car manufacturers offer basic Autopilot in select vehicles and, believe it or not, has been around for nearly 30 years. A South Korean professor, Min-hong Han, created a working autopilot as early as 1993. Despite his prototype working on busy highway roads, the government defunded the project. All this isn't to say that Tesla's Autopilot isn't a fantastic piece of technology. Still, there are other options available if this is a must-have feature.
    
The FSD costs $10,00 to buy outright or $200/month through a subscription. This feature is hardly worth it at this price as the navigation is only reliable on highways and straightaways. The basic Summon & Smart Summon that come with the FSD package are gimmicks at best, with little practical value for most drivers. The feature that may make it worth the price tag is the Autosteer on city streets. Unfortunately, that feature has been promised "within the year" for over a year now.

In October 2021, Tesla rolled out a beta version of the FSD package to a limited number of drivers. It gradually expanded to an estimated 10 to 15 thousand vehicles. Any driver with the FSD package can opt into the beta program and, if accepted, will have access to the world's most advanced autonomous driving system in the world. The driver must drive at least 100 miles and achieve a 98% or higher safety rating before being accepted into the program. The safety rating system checks for hard turns, dangerous following distance, hard braking, forward collision warning, and if driver negligence causes the autopilot/FSD to disengage automatically. This information is freely available to the driver on the Tesla application. While this beta program may seem odd, it makes the FSD program well worth the money.

Despite having the FSD beta for less than a month, the improvements found in the FSD beta program are the difference between night and day. While the base FSD is limited to highways and straightaways, the beta FSD works almost anywhere. The FSD beta is almost entirely autonomous, capable of overcoming all the standard package's shortcomings. It can navigate from your driveway to virtually any destination without human interaction. It can handle parking lots, winding roads, right or left turns, and city streets with relative ease. 

The first real test for the FSD beta was at the end of 2021, three days after getting into the beta program. I climbed in the car, set the destination, turned on the FSD beta, and started the 2-hour trek to Albany, NY. From my driveway, through the suburbs, highways, and city streets, the car navigated to the supercharger station at Colonie Mall without issue. Unlike my first trip to Los Angeles, this one required no intervention and even followed the "Slow Down and Move Over" laws for emergency vehicles.

While the FSD beta is far from perfect, manual intervention is seldom required. In the United States, there is an accident every 484 thousand miles. In Teslas that have at least the base Autopilot engaged, that number drops to one accident every 4.31 million miles. That is nine times lower than the national average. The list of items on which the FSD beta needs significant improvement is reminiscent of one you may give to an experienced yet overly cautious driver. It is undoubtedly too careful in certain situations. Still, we should prefer this behavior to the alternative for a car you are entrusting with your life.

Anyone debating on upgrading to the Full Self Driving Package may want to consider saving their money for now. While the FSD beta is without question the most advanced autonomous driving system globally, it does not warrant the $10,00 price tag for most drivers. Instead, the recently introduced FSD subscription at $200/month is a better match for most drivers to enjoy road trips.


https://www.tesla.com/VehicleSafetyReport?Q42021